This is Jocko podcast number 345 with Echo Charles and me,
Jocko willing.
Good evening Echo.
Good evening.
So just got back from an event at echelon front,
this event that we call the council.
And what is we have a small group of about 20 leaders.
We do it out in a very remote location in Northeast Washington
state.
And it's an opportunity to really get in depth with some
leadership tools with some high level leaders that are running
in most cases, very large organizations.
And when I was up there, I just wanted to share some of what I
talked about while I was there and actually one specific idea
that I first conceptualized at the council last year, 2021.
So in 2021, I went up there and essentially what happened was
it was a pretty interesting dynamic.
I get up there and we're sitting down.
It's a small group.
There's like 15 or 20 people there.
And Leif was telling a story about us being overseas or us
going through training.
And he kind of told a story where I came in at some point
and made like a leadership decision and boom,
it helped solve whatever the scenario was.
And then Andrew Paul was up there.
And Andrew Paul told a story that was something was going on.
And then I came in and kind of made some decision.
And then Leif told another one.
And so for whatever reason, they both told a couple stories
each that were illustrating some leadership point.
And in the stories, it made me look
like this decisive good leader, which is cool, great.
But of course, we're all telling stories about each other.
But a couple of the leaders that were there,
after this one session, they approached me.
And they said something along the lines of,
you just have such great natural leadership instincts.
And of course, my ego is immediately like, oh, hell, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, of course.
And then we had a quick conversation.
And they just said, oh, it's so cool to hear these stories where
you have these leadership instincts.
And I said, yeah, you know, it's pretty cool.
I'm pretty cool.
You know, all kind of that ego, idiocy.
And then as I thought about it, and we were on a break,
and as I thought about it, there was actually a break
at the end of the day.
As I thought about it, I thought, well, that's actually
not cool at all.
Because if my leadership is just some natural instinct,
then that implies that it's something
that I can't teach you.
I can't teach you.
I can't teach you something that is only instinctive.
So as I thought about it, I also realized not only is that bad,
but I also realized that there was plenty of times in my life
where, especially when I was younger,
and I didn't have much experience as a leader,
where I didn't make good decisions,
or I didn't even realize I needed to make a decision.
And so as I'm sitting there thinking about this during
this break, I realized that I had learned to lead,
and I developed knowledge and developed
kind of a process that was so embedded in my brain
that it seemed like instinct.
And when these guys hear the story, it seems like instinct.
But it's not instinct.
It's more of a process.
And so I sat in my room, and I went through and just sort of
wrote down the process that I used, the things that I think
about when I'm making a decision.
And since then, I've implemented that and teach it
at Eshalon Front.
And I've added a couple things to it since that time frame.
And basically call it the extreme ownership leadership loop.
And the reason is because extreme ownership, the book
that Leif and I wrote, that term just kind of encompasses
the broad principles that we try and operate by.
And there's a reason that I use the term loop.
The reason I use the term loop is clearly taken from the OOTA
loop, Observe, Orient, Decide, and Act.
And when you are making a decision,
you can utilize that loop, Observe, Orient, Decide,
and Act and what that means is, a real quick brief on that.
First of all, you observe, means you look around
and see what's happening.
Then you orient, you see where you are in what you have
observed, then you decide what you should do,
and then you act on it.
And once you've acted, you go back to looking around
and see how your actions impacted what's happening.
And then you orient yourself inside this new picture,
and then you decide what you should do now, and then you
act again, and you just keep running this loop.
And every time you take an action,
it's going to change the situation a little bit.
And then you have to observe that feedback,
orient yourself with that new feedback,
and then you make another decision.
And this becomes a little loop that you run over and over
again, and it comes from flying jets in combat and dogfights.
And it's a way that you win.
And the way that you win is by making decisions and observing
and orient yourself, deciding what you can do,
and acting faster than the other person can do it.
And if you can do that, you'll win.
And this also applies in Jiu-Jitsu, obviously.
So that's a loop that you need to run when
it comes to making decisions.
And this is a similar process to apply in this leadership
decision loop that I think through when
I'm trying to make a decision.
And again, a lot of times it seems like it's just
some instinct.
But there's a thought process behind it.
And listen, the Uda loop, for the most part, the Uda loop,
I view it as more of a tactical decision
in a physical realm against an enemy or a competitor.
It's sort of an interaction between you and someone else
in a physical, usually in a physical domain,
whether it's fighter, whether it's
tactical maneuver on the battlefield.
That's why it's so applicable to combat.
Because in combat, you're going against another person.
So as you decide and act, that's going to cause a reaction
that you have to then calculate into your new observations,
into your new orientation.
And so the Uda loop really is about,
it takes place in the physical realm, for the most part.
This loop that I'm talking about, this EO, this extreme
ownership, leadership loop, it's usually,
I shouldn't say usually not about physical decisions,
but it's equally applicable to conceptual ideas
or conceptual plans.
Or, and this is important, about human interaction
that's not physical.
It's more the conflict of ideas.
So one loop is, in my mind, more of something
that takes place in the physical realm.
This EO leadership loop takes place more
in the conceptual realm.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, fully.
Like in a social, verbal, all that.
Right.
And what this loop does is it provides a checklist
or a framework of things to consider while making a decision.
And listen, when you first hear this,
there's a bunch of things to think about.
And what's weird is I had been doing this for so long
that it seemed to other people, and really to me, as instinct.
And it wasn't until I said, wait a second,
is this really instinct, or is this
something I learned?
Well, I know I used to not have it.
Therefore, it can't be instinct.
I must have learned it.
What exactly am I thinking?
What am I considering when I'm out there trying
to make a decision in a leadership situation?
So let's talk through some of these things.
And there's a whole bunch of dynamics going on here.
And I don't want to simplify this to a point where you go, oh,
this is just a checklist.
Here's the 19 or 14 or whatever number of things.
And you just follow this checklist,
because each one of these things is a conceptual item.
There's a big difference between a conceptual idea
and a physical thing.
Because the physical thing is in this position.
It has this mass.
It has this weight.
It takes up this place in the world.
An idea, a concept, a plan, by its very nature is fluid.
So all these things, for the most part, are somewhat fluid.
Now, there's something about the first thing
that I think about when I'm making some kind of a decision
that's actually not fluid at all.
And that's why it's number one.
And that is time.
That's the number one thing I think about.
The first thing that I consider when I'm making decision
is time.
And the reason is, because this is the one thing that's not
fluid, it is what it is.
It is what it is.
And you can't stop it.
Can't stop it.
You know what I'm talking to?
Kerry Helton?
Sure.
You know him?
K-Dog.
That's right.
He was talking about Marine Corps Boot Camp.
And he had a good little hint for anybody that's
going through something tough.
And the thing that he thought about
was these drill instructors, they
might be all powerful in Marine Corps Boot Camp.
They are all powerful, near-Godlike figures.
But guess what?
They can't stop the clock.
And no one can stop the clock.
And I, you, us, we, we have no influence over time.
We do have influence over actions clearly,
but we don't have influence over time.
That clock is going to keep going.
Look, you can, you can, you can get ahead of it
by working hard, by thinking ahead.
And that's why it's the first thing that I think about.
But you can't stop it, no matter what.
That's why I can't stand being late.
That's why when going to the airport,
I'm going to show up early.
I look not crazy early, but I'm going to show up early enough
that nothing is going to make me panic.
Nothing is going to make me agitated.
The TSA dude's taking his time.
Cool, I got time.
And you ever notice when you're late for something,
everything goes against you?
Yeah, yeah.
Right?
Feels like it.
It's true.
If you're, if you're on time, green lights.
Yeah.
If you're late, red lights.
Red lights all day.
Not only that, but weird red lights.
Right?
Anomalous red lights.
How long is a red light when you're late?
That thing is forever.
Yeah, it's true.
But the weird thing is, it's the same.
It's just that you're different.
Your mentality is different.
I tell you that story about the other day,
speaking of like mentality.
So I was at REI.
You from the other REI?
The store?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sports store.
It's good.
So I'm in REI.
And I got a sprinter.
Sure.
Vehicle.
It's a good vehicle for sure.
Four-wheel drive sprinter.
No big deal.
And I get it.
OK, so do you know that sprinters are a thing?
Do you know that?
I know that now, yes.
Yeah.
They're a thing.
My wife told me that when she saw yours.
Yep.
And not only are they a thing, there's
also a big negative perception of them,
because they're expensive and people drive them around.
And they're into people that might have sprinters,
might be into sort of outdoors type sports
and a lot of times people that are in outdoors type sports
don't have a ton of money.
Oh, got you.
So hey, look at rock climbing.
Right?
Rock climbing, camp for Yosemite.
Their actual name for themselves is dirtbags.
Hey, we don't have money.
We live in a little freaking Toyota Corolla.
We sleep in a tent.
Like, that's what they're doing.
So you get those kind of people.
You get surf bums.
Right?
You and I have talked about the fact that bums is a lifestyle
and there's a bunch of them.
Surf bums, jujitsu bums, rock climbing bums, ski bums.
So there's a bunch of bums, right?
Well, all of those lifestyles can also
include people that might drive sprinters.
The bougie of the group.
The bougie people, right?
So I'm a bougie person, I guess, because I got a sprinter.
And guess what?
I like to surf.
I like to ski.
I go to Yosemite, right?
So I do those things.
So I'm at Ariai to pick up a bicycle.
Sure.
And as I'm pulling out, I'm leaving.
And by the way, I'm in no rush whatsoever.
Time is on my side.
I'm listening to an audiobook.
I'm totally chill.
I don't have to be.
I think we weren't recording that day.
I had done like a couple calls in the morning for echelon
front.
I was in no rush.
Just kind of enjoying.
Like, I was working in the morning.
And it was like a nice little mini vacation, to be honest.
We drive to Ariai.
You know, go to Ariai, you get up there,
you get to look around, see some cool gear.
It's nice, yeah.
So that's my mindset.
Just cruising to any.
By the way, it's midday.
This isn't a weekend.
This is like on a Tuesday or something.
There's no panic at all.
No one's even in there.
It's like after, I'll tell you how clear this was,
it's after the lunchtime rush on Tuesday.
Complete chill.
So as I'm pulling out, I won't try and explain the whole thing,
but there's like a three-way intersection in the parking
lot.
And so I back out my sprinter.
And there's another truck that I'm now head to head with.
He wants to go right to get out.
I want to go left to get out.
And in comes a little Volkswagen van again, Syncro.
So what this is, this is a four-wheel drive Volkswagen van.
Very rare, very cool.
Like one of the coolest, it's a very,
I won't say it's one of the coolest vehicles in the world,
but it's definitely in my top.
That's a cool vehicle.
They're super rare.
So Syncro, that's a four-wheel drive van.
Oh yeah, for a little Volkswagen van.
Yeah, I love vans.
So which is why I have a sprinter.
Yes, sir.
So I see this van and I'm kind of like, oh, dude, that's a sick.
Four-wheel drive Syncro van.
It's super rare.
They're hard to get.
And the truck wants to go right.
He goes right.
I'm like, cool.
That guy's being cool.
Or I give him the little hand wave.
He goes, because I'm super chill.
By the way, I'm looking at this cool Syncro.
So I give the guy a hand wave and the truck, I'm like, hey, man,
go ahead.
So he pulls out.
And then I think that the Syncro wants to make a right.
So I look at him.
I give him the hand wave.
Just like, hey, man, come on.
And I was, you know, the next hand signal
would have been thumbs up.
I might have even, I may have even rolled down the window
and said, sweet ride.
That's a sweet ride, man.
Respect, props.
I give him the hand signal.
Like, yeah, go ahead, man.
You can make the right turn and then I'll get out after you.
You get ahead of the line privileges.
You go first.
And guess what he does?
He starts freaking, you know, of course,
behind a windscreen.
I can't hear what he's saying.
He starts going crazy on me.
Like, he's yelling.
And what he was basically saying was he wanted me to move,
because the parking space I had just pulled out of,
he had pulled into.
And by the way, there was multiple parking spaces.
There was no factor.
But man, he was mad.
And he was like getting all hostile and like doing this
to me.
And I was just like, and of course, what I did,
smiled at him and waved at him anyways.
I didn't give him props for his synchro.
So if you're listening, nice synchro, bro.
And I hope your synchro and the fact
that you have a cool vehicle like that,
I hope that it soothes your soul a little bit.
Because he is an older dude, too.
He was at least my age.
He wasn't a spring chicken.
And there's no reason for him to be stressed out on a Tuesday
at 1,300 or 1,330 in the afternoon at REI.
No reason, man.
No reason.
So in his mind, whatever was happening for the time factor
was a problem.
For me, it was no factor.
But you can't get that stuff back.
You can't adjust time.
So we have to stay ahead of time.
So when I'm making a decision, the first thing
that I'm going to assess is how much time do I have?
Here's another thing.
How fast are things changing?
That's a time factor.
You have to look at, OK, I see things
are changing, but how fast are they changing?
Because if they're changing rapidly,
I might have to decide quicker.
If they're changing slowly, maybe I
can take a little bit more time.
Are there things that I can do to buy myself more time?
I know I said we can't control time,
but you can't do things that can earn you some time back.
Maybe there's an iterative step that I
can take that will slow things down a little bit on my side.
Again, I can't stop the clock, but I can slow them down.
So that's what I'm going to do.
I don't have any control over time,
and I'm going to think about that.
I'm going to consider it.
The number one element in my calculus is time.
And here's something else that I realize.
Some human beings have a better sense of time than others.
This is just a thing.
Some human beings are more aware of time than others.
There are people that are late habitually.
Right?
Do we know this?
We do know.
Actually, somebody at the council asked me,
hey, how do you do with echo being late all the time?
And I had to give them the information that you're actually
not.
I think you've only been literally late once or twice
for recording the podcast.
Yeah, it's once or twice.
Now, do you cut it down to literally 32 seconds?
And actually, if we included when you are maybe like 45
seconds late, we might have to add to that number.
But there's no time.
There's a very small number of actual violations.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think so.
But there are some people that are late all the time.
There are people that think that things are going to take
five minutes, and they take 20, and that's how they see time.
And so they're late all the time.
So if you're one of those people,
and this is going to be a constant theme,
if you're one of those people and you know that you don't
understand time and you don't pay attention to time,
the worst you are with time, if you're
a person that's habitually late, this should not only be the
number one thing in your decision making,
it should be number one, and it should be printed in bold,
large font so that you make sure that you get it.
Now, listen, I'm actually good with time.
In fact, sometimes I'm even too good with time,
and I'll tell you exactly what I mean by that.
Sometimes, if I think, let's say,
we were going to record the podcast at 10 o'clock,
and I was like, OK, in order to record the podcast at 10 o'clock,
I got to leave at 9.30.
That gives me a half an hour to get here.
It only takes 15 minutes to get here.
Tops, unless something wild happens,
or I hit every single red light or something.
So I might be like, oh, I need to take out the garbage right now.
But that's going to take me an extra two minutes,
and there's a 0.0001% chance that I hit every red light.
And now that two minutes that it took me to take out the garbage,
now I'm late.
So I didn't take out the garbage.
So sometimes I have to consciously say, yes, I can fit this in.
Yes, I can get that done.
And that is a good thing to do.
But I'm almost never late.
I would say never, but of course, I'm sure there's
been some time in the last 50 years where I was late
for something, but I'm almost never late.
And probably, and what I think is,
that's because of this loop that I run in my head.
I always think about time first.
And that.
So the reason I'm never late is because I
think about this all the time.
So know yourself.
And if you're a person that constantly
underestimates how much time it'll take to do something,
know yourself.
Understand your own bias.
And this is actually one of the things
that the loop is understanding your own biases.
This is where you've got to run that and make sure
that you're going to have enough time to do something.
Check.
Yeah, fully.
And regardless of my record of not being late very much,
here I am one of those people that underestimate.
How did you put it?
Underestimate how much time I have?
How much time?
Overestimate.
Overestimate how much time you have.
Underestimate how much time something is going to take.
Yes.
Interestingly, if we were to talk about how often
you were late for jujitsu, that's a big number.
Yeah.
That's a big number.
The majority, yeah.
It was weird.
Actually, in the beginning, when I was coming up,
I was never late.
But I think you're the one who said this to me kind of bluntly
a long time ago, where you said something like,
oh, it's because you don't think it's important or something
like this.
But I realized it's true, even though most of the time I
wouldn't admit that to the person that I'm late with
or whatever the entity or whatever.
When I worked in the nightclub, I was late most of the time.
And I'm not saying like, I was supposed to be there at 6
and I was there at like 6.30.
It wasn't that.
It was the kind of 6.01, 6.03.
How about 6.08?
6.08 from the time.
As you get up past five minutes late, it was less.
But it not being important, that was literally the case.
And not to say my job wasn't important,
I'm not saying that.
I'm saying the fact of me being ahead of time
or before 6 o'clock, that wasn't important to me.
If I was one, two, three, four, five minutes late,
that was fine with me for this reason now that I analyze it.
Because I could be doing more important things
than in that five minutes, or in that one minute,
or in that two minutes.
Kind of a thing, kind of a thought ahead of my head.
And now, more important things, taking a nap,
you know, and watching stuff that, the way I saw it was,
and this is me totally analyzing it mentally.
This wasn't in my mind the whole time.
Like, oh yeah, this TV show is way more important than me.
It wasn't like that.
It was just as it turns out that, like, dang,
why would I essentially go to where
I have to be kind of a thing when I want to do this?
And I don't have to be there.
I don't have to be there at 6.59 or 5.59.
One of my seal buddies, when I was going to college,
there was another seal that was going to college as well.
And we actually made a deal.
Because in order to be on time for something,
because of parking at this particular college,
and eventually I figured out that I would just throw my bike
in the back of my van and just whip the bike out
and bike to the class.
Park away away from campus and just jump on my bike
and drive or ride the bike.
But when we would be studying together,
and we'd be like, hey, we'll study it.
I'll meet you at 9 o'clock to study.
We did this a few times.
And then eventually, and he was like a guy like me married
with kids.
So we didn't want to, if we didn't have to be at campus,
we didn't want to be there.
Not to mention Jiu Jitsu, not to mention surfing.
So there's a bunch of other things we'd all rather be doing.
So we made a deal.
I was like, hey, I'll see you around 9.
And he was like, yeah, because that way, if you rolled up
and you took you an extra four minutes to find parking,
you weren't like, dude.
Because the only way to ensure you weren't going
to be four minutes late was to be a half an hour early.
You see what I'm saying?
The only way to, it cost you 26 minutes of life
in order to ensure that you weren't going
to be four minutes late.
And so we were like, hey, listen, around 9.
And we actually had the conversation,
because both of us squared away like, hey, being late
is the worst thing in the world.
And we made an agreement, a gentleman's agreement,
that in this particular scenario, you had slack.
You had slack.
Yes, I'm great.
And when you got there, you got there.
It wasn't going to be 20 minutes late.
But it was going to be four minutes.
It might be six minutes.
It might be three minutes.
So we had that little gentleman's agreement.
So the target is nine.
Target is nine.
And I'll be there.
And if you're not there, I know 100% why.
It's because you weren't going to leave 26 minutes earlier
to be there on time.
Because it didn't make sense, because I'd rather
he was with his kids, or he was surfing,
or he was doing jujitsu.
Actually, he did jujitsu.
I knew he was doing something that was more important
than sitting and waiting for me to show up
to prove that we could both be on time.
Yeah.
So that's interesting how you say it.
Or that's an interesting concept, because that's essentially
the agreement I made with my work.
They didn't make that agreement.
But I did, too, where it's like, hey, I'm not going to give up.
Because it was the same kind of scenario, where
you have to look for parking.
Sure, you could pay for parking, but not what.
I got to pay extra to be at work kind of a thing.
And I'm not saying that's good, but I'm not
saying that that should be the case or shouldn't be the case.
I'm just saying that's what I thought at the time.
That was the agreement in Echo's head.
Yes, exactly.
So downtown San Diego, 6 o'clock PM,
especially on those Thursday, Friday, Saturday scenarios,
that's hard to find parking.
Or it can be, anyway.
So yeah, so I'd be like, OK, I'm going to go out to my opportune
time, my best time in my mind.
And hey, if I'm struggling finding parking,
I'm struggling finding parking.
In your mind, it was no factor.
The gentleman's agreement.
Because you would have had to leave legitimately, probably
a half an hour early, to ensure 100% that you were going to be
on time.
Yeah, probably a little bit more exactly right.
To ensure, like, the kind, no, you got to be here before 6
or whatever kind of a thing, to ensure, yeah, it's like half
an hour.
It's like, bro, it's not even, in my mind, it's not even fair.
How about this?
Well, we'll decide a reasonable amount of time
I have to leave the house.
How about that?
And if parking is abnormally scarce, or traffic,
we're going to pay that price together.
How about that?
The traffic thing is weird, too, because that's an excuse
that people use.
Like, oh, yeah, I really hit traffic.
And if you live in California, you're like, bro,
you got to calculate for that.
Come on.
Yeah, I agree.
It's kind of not a valid excuse, unless, let's say you
and I work in an office every single day.
And we make that agreement.
Like, hey, our goal is 9 o'clock, but I understand.
I don't want you to leave an hour early to make sure you
get here at that time.
And I go, hey, man, you leave your house.
Like you said, you leave your house before this time?
Reasonable.
I knew that there's going to be some variables.
Yeah.
And especially if they're like, the variables really vary.
Because the traffic thing, I don't know about your routes
in San Diego, whatever, but as far as the routine goes,
very lucid routine that I have, it's
I know when the traffic is going to be.
It's pretty predictable.
You got your anomalous accident or some hold up on the road
every once in a great, great, great while.
But so it is, to me anyway, I think
that factoring the traffic is a fair thing.
Like you got to, hey, if it takes 15 more minutes
on this Tuesday after work versus Sunday morning
or whatever, then that's part of the agreement.
You got to factor that in.
Put that in calculus.
But Sunday morning, let's say Sunday morning,
every time we're recording and then or whatever we're doing
and then no traffic.
And then one day there's like traffic
because there's some event at the beach or something.
I do expect a little bit of what do you call it?
Lieway.
OK.
Kind of.
We'll see about that.
So that is time.
First thing you got to be thinking about causes stress.
Get ahead of it.
The next thing, and this should really come as no surprise,
the next things that I think about are the four laws
of combat leadership, cover move, simple prioritizing,
execute, and decentralized command.
But I think about them in a very particular way.
So if I'm making a decision, the first thing
I'm going to think about is cover move.
The number one thing is, am I supporting my teammates?
Does this help the team?
Am I putting my team first?
So I want you to think about that.
The first thing I think about is time,
because I have no control about it.
The second thing I do is make sure
that I am not putting myself ahead of the team
and I'm not making a decision that's
going to leave anyone else on the team in the lurch.
And this will immediately vector you in the correct direction.
Because anytime that you, as a human, are making a decision
and it's based on benefiting you, there's
a really good chance that that's a bad call.
And from a leadership perspective,
there is a huge chance.
As a matter of fact, I'm going to go ahead and say,
that's a bad call.
The military term is supporting distance.
So echo, if I'm working with you, if my fire team or my squad
or my platoon is supporting your fire team, your squad,
your platoon, I have to stay within a distance where
I am able to support you.
That means usually my weapons can cover
where you may be attacked from.
And my communications can speak to you directly.
And generally speaking, in an infantry scenario,
I want to be where I can actually see you.
I can actually put on my night vision or at least pull out
my binoculars and see where you are.
I got him.
I know exactly where he is.
The minute that we're out of that supporting distance,
there's going to be a problem.
So from a tactical perspective, that's
a great thing to think about.
But from a leadership perspective,
cover and move is am I being supportive of the rest of my team?
And if you're not, it's going to be a problem.
Now, here's a couple of things to watch out for.
Some people have a tendency to look out for themselves.
And some people, if they have that tendency,
one of the worst things about that tendency is they don't
think anyone else can see it.
And I'm telling you right now, when people are getting screwed,
they see it.
And in whatever subtle way, whatever maneuver you're doing
that you think no one else can see that you're leaving people,
everyone can see it.
They can see it.
1,000%, they can see what's going on.
So if you think you might be a person,
and this goes back to what are your own personal biases,
if you are a person that goes through life that kind of looks
out for yourself, this is where you
need to index in the right direction appropriately
to make up the fact that you're a little bit of a person that
takes care of yourself.
So just watch out for that.
And the way you watch out for that
is by when you're making a decision,
this is the second thing you ask yourself.
Am I making this decision, and it's
only going to benefit me?
And more important, am I supporting my teammates
with this decision that I'm going to make?
And if you're not, reconsider.
The next one is keeping things simple.
How complicated is this decision?
Or how much complexity will this decision add to our situation?
And that's really a great way to think about it.
Will this decision take our current situation
and simplify it?
If it's going to do that, that's very, very helpful.
If this decision is going to make things more complex,
this is usually not a good decision.
So the minute you say, oh, we just
need to get some more people down here into the mix,
and all of a sudden you think to yourself, wait a second,
that's actually going to make things more complicated.
Reconsider.
Again, you can still, hey, any one of these things
that I'm saying right now, there are situations where you have
to still push through it.
It's when you're not thinking about it.
When you're not being intentional about your decision,
that's when you're going to have a problem.
Most important, when you don't even recognize,
a lot of times people are making things more complex.
They don't even know it, because they're
not considering things that I'm talking about.
Sometimes they're screwing people over.
They're not even thinking about it.
Look, there's sometimes where I'm screwing over
Echo with my decision, but I just don't think he's going
to notice or I don't care.
Sometimes I'm doing it, and I just,
I don't even recognize the fact that, oh, I didn't realize
Echo was going to get left out in the cold one time
for you.
Lath Bab and we were staying in a hotel at the muster,
and we had like, I had a room, he had a room,
and they were joined by like a unit room or whatever,
like a, what's that word?
A common area.
Yeah, a common area.
But actually, the entrance to my room
was through the common area.
And then, so to get into my room,
you'd go through the common area,
and then I'd go into my room.
Lath had, he could go into the common area,
and then to his room, or he could go through the hallway.
So we went to PT, and I forget how it happened,
but he locked the common area door.
So, and then we got split up when I came back,
I didn't have the key to his room.
You know that little, you know, like the key,
the mechanical lock on a door?
He had swung that thing shut.
So I could, so we were laughing.
He was actually trying to help me out,
but he locked me out of my room, which was awesome.
Sure, awesome.
He didn't know, he didn't know that,
he didn't know that we were all both gonna leave
through his room.
So anyways, my point is, sometimes you're doing things,
and you don't understand the secondary effects.
So that's one of the benefits of having a checklist.
Because the minute you say, oh, wait a second,
the jockel might actually have to come back in,
and I won't be with him,
so therefore I should open the door from the inside.
Cool, got it, done.
Sometimes I say, oh, I wanna do this thing,
oh, but am I really covering for echo?
No, I'm not, I gotta help him out, okay.
So one of the uses of running this loop,
and going through this checklist,
is you make sure you're not doing something
that doesn't make sense,
that you weren't aware of.
So make sure that you are covering for the rest of your team,
make sure you're putting the team first
when you make a decision.
Next one, simple.
Well, I already covered simple,
making sure things are complicated.
The next one is prioritize and execute.
Does this decision that I'm about to make
match the priorities that we should be focused on?
That's step number one.
Hey, wait a second, I'm about to go in this direction.
Does that even help us getting where we wanna go?
Then you kinda have to dig a little bit deeper.
Are the priorities that I'm focused on right now,
are they even correct?
Because sometimes what you're focused on right now changes,
and you have to adapt.
If you and I are rolling and I'm trying to defend an armlock,
you're trying to armlock me,
and all of a sudden you get my neck,
guess what the priority is?
Priority is my neck, protect your neck, right?
So priorities are going to change.
And so you have to make sure when you make a decision
that you're supporting the right priority,
or you're supporting the priority that you have designated,
and you also have to double check that the priority
that you're focused on is the right one,
or the priorities plural that you're focused on
are the right one's plural.
And then once again, you gotta check your own tendencies
because some people have a tendency to get distracted.
And if you're a person that has tendency to get distracted,
then you need to double down
on making sure you focus on the right priorities.
Some people have a tendency to try and accomplish too much.
They have the tendency to be like,
those people might usually have also a bad relationship
with time where they think they can do more
than they have time for,
and then they also say, I can do that,
I can do that, I can do that.
Even though I have a good relationship with time,
sometimes I do try and bite off more than I can chew,
but not very often, most of the time I don't do that.
Most of the time I could actually take the garbage out
before I go to Jiu-Jitsu,
but I don't wanna be two minutes late,
so therefore I'm gonna take the garbage out later.
I should have taken it out.
I should have rolled the dice that there's a 0.001%
that I'm a minute and 28 seconds late.
So know what your tendencies.
There's people that have a tendency
to shift priorities too often,
similar to being distracted, right?
But they're like, no, we need to focus on this,
and then three days later, no, we need to focus on this,
and then three days later, no, we need to focus on this.
That actually happens.
And of course there's some people
that get fixated on a priority that may or may not matter
as time goes on, so that can happen as well.
So when you are making a decision,
check your priority list,
and make sure that your decision supports the priority,
and then also double check that the priority you're focused on
or priorities that you are focused on are the right ones.
Pretty straightforward.
Decentralize command.
Here's a really good rule of thumb
if you're in a leadership position.
The decision that I'm about to make,
can I decentralize and delegate the action?
So as soon as I'm thinking of doing something,
I think to myself, oh, can I turn this over to someone else?
So hey, we gotta get that building cleared?
Yes, we're gonna clear that building.
Hey, Laef, grab your squad, grab your platoon,
grab your team, go get that building cleared.
Can I turn it over to someone else?
Hey, Echo, we need to come up with some cool graphics
for this event that we're gonna do.
Can I turn that over to you?
I wanna know if I can, because my goal is to not be focused
on doing things myself, because the minute
that I'm doing something myself,
I can't look up and I can't look out,
which is going to impair my ability to lead.
This also allows me to be aware.
And again, so much of this is awareness.
It allows me to be aware that sometimes
there's something that I do have to do.
And I've gotta say, hey, Echo,
I've gotta go do this thing, cover me.
Or hey, Echo, I'm gonna be going and executing
on this thing, watch my back,
or look up and out while I'm doing this.
So these are all things that, again,
it's okay to make those decisions
as long as you're aware of it.
But the minute I go, hey, I'm gonna go execute this thing
and I don't tell you to look out, now we get flanked.
We're looking, hopefully, with decentralized command,
we're hoping, and the goal is that we are only doing things
that only we can do.
I only wanna do things that only I can do.
Everything else, I wanna have someone else on the team do it.
That's the goal.
And by the way, the things that I can do,
I eventually want to train someone else
to be able to do those things.
How do you balance the,
okay, remember, it was your story about
somebody came to you, it was like,
I need this advice, whatever,
and you said, put them in charge of something they put,
and then that person put them in charge of something
that was really undesirable, like cleaning.
Cleaning toilets at SEAL Team 2 on the second deck.
That was the mission someone was tasked with
in order to give them more responsibility.
And it didn't help the situation, it made them more mad.
So how do you find the balance?
Because kinda in a way that kinda,
in a matter of speaking, translates over to
what you're talking about now where it's like,
hey, can I delegate this?
Can I delegate this?
Which a lot of times, depending on the project
of delegation, it can empower someone,
it can help the whole group, because they can do this
while you're doing quote unquote more important things
or whatever.
How do you balance what you delegate them to do
with something important or whatever versus something that,
cause you know something needs to be done
but no one really wants to do it kind of a thing?
Hey, if something sucks, I'm gonna get in there
and do it somehow.
This is the picking up brass story, right?
Because picking up brass, it's real easy to say,
you know what guys, I gotta go back to
meet with the commanding officer,
I gotta go back and prep a brief,
so I'll be back in the air conditioned office,
back in San Diego, while you guys are out here
in 120 degree heat picking up brass.
Real easy to say that.
So decisions like that, I'm gonna be very cautious
and I'm gonna weigh my leadership capital,
which we'll get to, because if, look,
does this mean if the commanding officer's like,
hey, I need a brief tomorrow, I'm like,
sorry sir, I'm picking up brass?
No, it doesn't mean that.
But I better prioritize building a relationship
with the troops, making sure they understand
that I don't mind getting my hands dirty,
don't mind getting my knees freaking cut up,
don't mind having blisters on my hands
and picking up hot brass out in the desert.
That's what I'm gonna do.
So there's some variables that we have to weigh into.
And that's also why good deals give them away, you know?
Hey, someone's gotta go ashore early
and spend an extra four days in wherever,
this nice vacation area of Thailand.
It's like, oh, no, I'm gonna go on the ad bond.
And it's like, no, no, hey, echo, you gotta take these guys,
make sure we have the stuff that we need
for the training in Thailand.
And you're like, awesome, right?
So that's how I weigh it out.
I have to assess the suck meter.
And if you're a person that always sees the suck meter high
and runs the other way, everybody knows it.
So don't do it.
So it's kind of a little balancing act game
within the game kind of a thing.
100%.
Yeah, because if you just be rigid,
or this is what it seems like anyway,
if you just be rigid to the, hey, I'm always gonna delegate
and then it's when it comes to, you know,
oh, trash needs to be taken out.
I got an extra three minutes or whatever now,
but no, no, no, I'm sticking to the rule.
Delegate, delegate, you know, kind of a thing.
No, things that suck, try not to delegate.
And look, that could also mean
if you're the platoon commander,
guess what you're doing all day?
Cleaning the toilets, picking up brass,
like you could be, you get to sign yourself
every task that kind of sucks.
And we don't wanna do that.
So we have to put that into the calculus.
We don't just delegate things that suck.
In fact, you know, the late, late tells the story,
we were going through the our dive portion of training
and diving kind of sucks, you know,
it's cold, wet, miserable, long, boring.
And some people think,
and so a lot of guys had given the opportunity,
they have meetings to attend during time.
They have whatever reports to write.
And Leif and Seth, you know,
they were kind of like surprised,
here I am, got my wetsuit on, got my fins out,
we're ready to go dive,
ready to go spend four hours turtle backing around
San Diego Bay and picking three hours on bag
in the darkness, you know, bored out of your mind,
but that's what you do.
So that's one of those things where if it sucks,
use caution while delegating.
Make sense?
Fully, yeah, fully.
It's the kind of more of the approach to it, right?
Where it's like, you gotta understand the overall picture
of what are you doing here, you know?
And why are you doing it kind of a thing?
So if you have more important things to do,
you delegate these things,
they're all important because they're all pieces
of the puzzle.
But yeah, there's another, like I said, game kind of
going on where you wanna be looking out for everyone
in that little additional way, you know?
And you're gonna sacrifice little parts of kind of yourself
to kind of do it.
So we kind of got the four laws of combat covered.
The next thing I'm gonna think about,
and this is a big one,
is making sure that our ego is not driving this decision,
which you would be shocked and dismayed
at the number of decisions that are driven by ego.
Driven by ego.
They're almost 100% in some cases driven by ego.
Am I making this decision based on my ego?
Am I imposing it as punishment,
subconscious punishment on someone who questioned me?
Am I forcing this to prove to echo
that my plan was the better plan?
So you have to be extremely cautious of that.
And the thing that we have to be careful of
is that our ego can absolutely, not even,
your ego is going to lie to you.
That's what our ego does.
Our ego is going to lie to us.
And if it's tricky too,
your ego's smart, your ego's, it's like the devil.
You ever seen the movie The Exorcist?
Yes.
So in the movie The Exorcist,
the devil knows the things to say to the priest
that's gonna get him.
And your ego is equally smart as the devil.
And it knows, my ego's like,
hey, hey, Jocko, I know I get extreme ownership.
Hey, I buy into extreme ownership 100%.
But this time is actually really is Echo's fault.
Echo's plan's really not as good as yours.
I get it.
I know you wanna be humble,
but hey, if you're humble now,
it's actually gonna cost you in the long run.
That's the way your ego talks to you.
It's like a little savage in there, just manipulating.
So you gotta be very careful of that.
The other thing that happens is,
if your ego's running the decision,
have you listened to anybody else?
Have you listened to other people with an open mind?
Do you have an open mind?
So be careful of that.
Cause sometimes we're listening, but we're not hearing.
And then a good little sanity check,
am I doing this?
Am I using this decision?
Am I driving this decision with my rank,
with my position?
Even with my experience.
And let me explain what that sounds like.
The idea of driving, it sounds good, right?
It sounds good for me to say,
hey, I'm more experienced.
That's why I'm making this decision.
But that's the equivalent as,
dude, I've been doing this for 20 years.
You need to shut up and listen to me.
Any of those things, if the main driver of your decision
and the way you're convincing people is through experience
or through rank or through position or authority,
you already lost.
You already, let me just say you lost,
but you need to reconsider what's happening.
Because if I can't articulate to you, Echo Charles,
why I made this decision without saying,
cause I outrank you or because I'm in charge of this
or because I've done this type of thing 20 times,
if I have to go there, that means I'm not really,
I can't articulate why we're going with my plan.
And that's a problem.
And the problem most likely is my ego.
So use caution on that.
And right tied up next to that is emotion.
Am I making an emotional decision?
I mean, what a smart little thing to check on.
And if you check on it, you're gonna realize
that it's a bad move.
People make emotional decisions all the time.
And by the way, they almost never turn out good.
Am I mad?
Am I frustrated?
Am I vengeful?
Am I fearful?
Am I guilty?
Guilt is an emotion.
That'll make you do something
that you know you shouldn't do.
Fear is an emotion that'll make you do something
that you shouldn't do.
Frustration.
I'm getting frustrated.
You don't want to just go ahead and do it, right?
These are horrible things.
So check with yourself and make sure
that your emotions are not driving the decision.
Now listen, here's the other thing.
Here's the dichotomy.
Is your emotions do still have to be part of the calculus?
They gotta be part of the calculus.
You gotta calculate your own emotions to get the answer.
You gotta calculate the emotions of the team
to get the answer.
Because if the team is all mad about doing this thing.
And I say, you know what though?
Logically, we should do it.
All right guys, this is the logical answer.
Go do it.
And all it does is make everyone matter.
First of all, are you gonna execute well?
Are you gonna do a good job?
Are you trustworthy while you're out there and you're mad?
What did it do to my leadership capital?
All these problems is gonna cause.
So I have to put emotions into the calculus.
But it can't be the overwhelming driver
of my decision making.
It has to be a component.
But it should be a small component in most cases.
Meaning, if I know that making some decision
is gonna make the entire team totally irate.
I need to wait it a little bit more
because the emotion is stronger.
But you have to calculate it.
And if you're not aware of it,
if you're not paying attention to it,
then it's not gonna work out the way you want it to.
It's gonna actually cause bad decisions.
Next one, perspective.
Perspective people throw this around.
People throw this around.
Make sure you know what other people's perspectives is.
But they only throw it around when they think about it.
But a lot of times we get locked into our perspective
and that's bad.
I wanna see as many different perspectives on a subject,
on a topic, on an idea that I can.
I wanna know my peers' perspectives.
I wanna know my subordinates' perspectives.
I wanna know my superiors' perspectives.
I wanna know my competitors or my enemies' perspective.
What are they actually seeing right now?
The more angles I see of a target or of a problem,
the better I can understand it.
And the better I can understand it,
the better off I'm going to be.
And we have this thing when you do a reconnaissance
of a target, a building or a compound.
When you do it, what you try and do is you try
and move around the entire perimeter over a period of time.
You try and see it from every different possible angle.
If you don't see something from every possible angle,
there's something that you're missing.
And that thing that you're missing
could be a critical component of the target
or of the problem.
So by asking your subordinates,
hey, what does this look like to you?
By asking your peers, like, hey, what do you see here?
By asking your boss, hey, what does it look like
from your perspective?
By doing that, it's gonna give you a better understanding
of the target, of the problem, of the issue,
and then you can better formulate a plan.
And by the way, my default mode
is to take, when someone else says,
hey, Jocko, I see a solution,
my default mode is to try and utilize their solution,
try and utilize their plan, try and utilize their idea.
That's my default mode.
Now, if there's a leadership vacuum,
and I wrote about this in leadership strategy tactics,
field manual, if there's a vacuum,
no one's making a decision, sure.
I'm gonna step in.
I'm gonna give you some little hints here.
When there's a leadership vacuum,
I'm gonna let that leadership vacuum develop it
a little bit extra, just a little bit extra.
I'm gonna let that void, let the presence of that silence,
of that non-direction, of that lack of leadership.
I'm gonna let it sit there for an extra second, two seconds.
Why am I doing that?
Because I want everyone to know
that there's a leadership void.
And it doesn't take long, it takes a second,
it takes two seconds, three seconds.
And all of a sudden, everyone goes,
oh, and when everyone knows there's a leadership void,
everyone is primed to execute.
Everyone is ready to receive orders.
So, if there's a leadership void,
I'm gonna make sure everyone can feel it.
By the way, those extra two, three seconds,
I'm actually confirming the plan in my head
that I have formulated.
So now my plan is gonna be two or three seconds
further developed and better.
And then I make the call.
And yes, I'm gonna make a small call, an iterative decision.
And if someone else happens to make a call at the same time,
guess what I'm gonna do?
I'm gonna support their call.
Because that's my default mode.
My default mode is to support someone else's call.
Because that is the easiest way to move forward with a plan.
The easiest way to move forward with a plan
isn't with Echo has a plan and I have a plan
to try and convince Echo that my plan is better.
The easiest way, the quickest way to move is to say,
Echo, sounds good, I'm on board.
What do you want me to do?
How can I support?
Unless Echo's plan is freaking horrible.
Actually, let me rephrase that in a more distinct way.
Unless Echo's plan is unviable.
It's an unviable plan that will not work.
If it's a minimally viable plan,
it'll get the job done.
You have a minimally viable plan and I have a viable plan.
So that means mine might be a little bit better.
But now I have to convince you of that.
I have to explain why.
And by the way, when I say I'm gonna support your plan,
I can probably bring some additional viability
to your plan that can make your plan better
than mine was in the first place.
So that's what I'm gonna do.
That's the easiest way to do it.
Now, what do we need to think about here?
Is we need to think about the fact that we almost all,
here's a bias, that almost all of us have the same bias,
which is my idea is the best idea.
That's our general consideration as humans.
My idea is the best idea.
So know that you have that bias.
I actually go hard against that bias.
And quite frankly, sometimes I go too hard against that bias.
Sometimes someone's got a plan, I'm like, eh.
And it might be minimally, really minimally viable.
And I'll be like, you know what, we'll go with it.
Sometimes I do that a little bit too much.
So I know that.
Why do you think you do that?
Just wanna be supportive.
Don't wanna be a imposing tyrant on the team.
And generally, I'm like, thinking to myself,
oh, you know, my plan's good,
but we can probably make Eglas' plan worth.
I would rather do it.
Why? I'll tell you why.
I literally believe what I'm saying right now.
It's usually easier for me just to support your plan
than it is for me to convince you of this other plan
and explain it to you.
I can uptake your plan pretty quick.
I get it cool, let's go execute that thing.
I'm supporting you, let's run with it.
And then I'm detached from your plan
so I can see a little bit more when it's my plan.
All of a sudden, I gotta manage that whole thing
and I'm staring right into it.
And I don't know how good you are at being detached
and trying to adjust things.
You might not be as good as me.
So you know what?
I'm gonna let you, detachment is a harder skill
than the planning and execution.
Or it's a rarer skill.
If I tell you to go and execute something,
there's a good chance you'll be able to do it.
If I tell you, hey, I'm gonna go execute,
you detach and sit on the outside
and try and give me some broad guidance
about how I can do better.
That's a harder job.
Because most of the time you'll be like,
I'm starting to execute my plan,
you're gonna jump in there with me,
you're gonna start doing it too.
So that's why I sort of overindex on allowing,
on providing support or allowing people to do things
that maybe I don't 100% agree with.
I mean, you've done some stuff where I've been like,
well, that didn't seem to be the best idea, was it?
And we can look back post-mortem.
Is this a Christmas music thing?
Christmas music, that's a good one, right?
Get that over it.
You know, some things happen, you're like,
you're not good, that's not what we were looking for at all.
Did you say you didn't even know that was a Christmas song?
Damn, that's correct.
They know, I don't know, sorry.
I do now though, so.
You gotta watch out for that one.
So that's the deal.
It's perspective, you have to actually pull yourself back
and try and see other people's perspectives.
And the best way to do that is by talking to them,
asking them good questions about what they see.
You're not gonna be a freak and, what's the word?
A psychic that I can see what Echo sees.
I don't go into a meditative state
and go into your brain.
No, I go, hey Echo, what does that look like to you?
This isn't freaking, this isn't freaking remote viewing.
This isn't remote viewing.
What's the deal with Rome?
Do you think it's true?
I don't know.
They had big programs with it in the military.
There's a movie about it.
Yeah, I mean, I don't, if it is true,
I don't know how it works at all.
It doesn't seem.
It could be, the guys are really good at guessing.
Maybe, you know.
Well, a lot of the, what do you call it,
like the psychic, you know, mediums and minorities
and stuff, that's as it turns out from what I understand,
that's what it is.
It's not guessing, but it's like guessing about,
like they react to cues with you,
like how you respond.
So it's like, I'm seeing red.
And then if they do something, they're like,
okay, red is something, you know?
Do you know a person name?
And they go real basic names first?
Cause I'm feeling a John or a Jim.
Yeah, yeah, but it would be even broader.
It's like, do you know anyone that's,
do you know anyone that's experienced trouble
in their life right now?
And if I see you like, that I'm like, wait,
are they sick?
You know what I mean?
And at the same time, my mind is awake.
Do I?
Then I search for everyone in my whole,
it's like, whether it's significant or not,
you kind of make it significant.
So it's like a dance going on.
Maybe we'll have a remote viewer on the program.
Cause the military had like a remote viewer group.
People that, that's what they did.
Sit in a room and go into a meditative state
and look for, you know, missile launch pads,
stuff like this.
I guess the argument for and against it,
in a matter of speaking, is kind of the same thing
where it's like, your brain is so complex.
And we, you know, there's a lot of stuff about your brain
and all this stuff that we don't know.
So it's possible, but at the same time,
it's kind of like, all right, well,
I don't see how your eyes can like see something
that they don't see and it's your brain, you know,
like it doesn't make sense.
Given what we do know, it doesn't make sense.
Eddie Bravo has a podcast now
and it's called, Look Into It.
I think it's called Look Into It,
which is a freaking great name.
And this makes me think, you know,
maybe we need to get Eddie Bravo to look into it
and see what's up, see what's up with remote viewing.
Cause he's looking into a bunch of stuff.
Oh yeah. You know why it's called Look Into It?
I think it's cause of what I just said.
Is there another reason?
Yeah. Well, that's the thing that there was a,
Oh, is it a meme?
Kind of that he, he was on a podcast.
I forget which one it was, but it was one,
you know, one of Joe Rogan's podcasts.
He was on there and then they got into this heated
like argument about, you know,
one of the things that Eddie Bravo really kind of reports.
Maybe wasn't UFOs, what was it?
I don't know, 9-Eleven maybe.
I don't know.
I forget what it was, but he kept saying,
you just haven't looked into it.
You just haven't looked into it kind of, you know what I mean?
That was kind of his defense to a lot of things.
But he said it so many times that like it became a thing.
Well, it's a great name for his podcast.
Cause I said, what are you doing?
It's out there looking into it.
The weird thing about looking into things these days
is you can kind of find what you want to find.
Whatever you want.
Yeah, that's true.
There's all kinds of things to find what you want.
Yeah.
To find.
If you look into it.
People enough.
Well, yeah.
And okay, so we have this trampoline.
It's called a rebounder.
It's like essentially like a regular little trampoline,
but it's like, I don't know, more robust.
I don't know, whatever.
How big is it?
Like the regular size ones, like this table,
maybe a little bigger.
That's not a regular size.
So when I think trampoline,
I think of something that you, that is like 15 feet across.
Yeah.
Like a leg breaker.
But this thing is like one of those fitness trampolines
when you jump on it.
Yeah, exactly.
But it's the one where it's like, there's no noise.
It's called a rebounder.
If I'm not mistaken.
So anyway, one of the claims is that,
oh yeah, it does something to your lymph system.
Okay.
Like it like does something to it.
Elevates it somehow.
Makes it better.
Yeah.
You know, the pressure and here's the thing.
That could be a hundred percent true.
It could be.
Well, look into it.
Yeah, you look into it.
So I go and look in and you know, my wife,
she's like saying, yeah, my dad told me and this,
and he has one and let's face it.
The kids jump on it.
It's fun.
That's my main kind of catalyst or whatever.
You didn't even have to look into that.
Yep.
Then lymph or no lymph systems.
It's fun.
The kids freaking love it and whatever.
It's good for your legs too, obviously.
But I'm like, if I'm going to talk trash,
which I do just jokingly because I don't,
I don't know if it helps your lymph system or not.
If I'm going to talk trash,
I should at least look into it.
So I looked into it and sure enough,
it says, yeah, it does this, your lymph system,
but then just like what you're eluding to
where you kind of got to consider the source, you know?
And then, oh, what, what I'm gonna spend my day
looking into this five websites that said this.
Now I got to determine the credibility.
So it's like hard, you know?
Yeah.
There's all kinds of credit.
Cause you can make a website that has,
oh, click here for the supporting documentation,
but you also wrote the supporting documentation, right?
So even when you're looking into it,
you're not looking in the right place.
Yeah, it's true, man.
Holy cow.
What platform is Eddie Bravo's?
Do you know what, it's on a platform.
I don't know if it's on an open platform.
Oh, I don't know.
I have to look into it.
I got to look into it.
So there you go.
Perspective.
You got to look into some other people's perspectives
and figure out what the whole target,
what the whole problem looks like.
So there you go.
Perspective.
Spend some time.
Put that on your checklist.
The perspective you have, by the way,
is not the whole thing.
And there's a good chance that your perspective
is actually wrong, right?
Hey, I don't see any enemy on this target.
All you need to do is go 90 degrees in the other direction.
You can see a bunch of enemies sitting behind a building.
Hey, make your bias that your perspective
is probably a little bit off.
Maybe even make your bias that you're wrong.
That what you see is not the whole picture.
That what you see is actually a bad picture.
That's what I think of my perspective.
I think, you know what?
This is what I see.
And I know my gut instinct is like,
I know I don't not see everything.
And there's more to the picture
and I need to figure out what that is.
Make that part of your checklist.
Next thing is mission.
So is the decision that you're about to make,
does it support the mission
that you're actually trying to execute on?
And not actually more important than that,
does it support your overall strategic mission?
And this causes all kinds of, there's a term out there.
Have you heard term mission creep?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a pretty common term now.
This is because people don't run this leadership loop
in their brain and they don't ask themselves,
hold on a second, what's our mission?
What's our overall mission?
And is this in support of it?
If I make this decision,
it's gonna help us reach our strategic goals.
All kinds of people make that mistake.
And we can't allow for that.
So what you do is you just run a quick check and say,
hold on, does this support the tactical mission
that we're trying to execute?
Does this support the strategic mission
that we're trying to achieve?
And if it doesn't, you know it's a bad decision.
Next one, leadership capital.
And this is one that I recently added to this list.
And the reason that I added to the list
is because at some point I was having a discussion
with somebody and I realized, actually,
let me rephrase this, I was making a decision
and I realized that the main thing that I was calculating
was how much this was gonna cost me
from a leadership capital perspective.
And so first of all, what is leadership capital?
Leadership capital is the fact
that you can only get people to do so much.
As a leader, you can only get people to do so much.
When you ask somebody to do something, it costs.
It costs you leadership capital.
And if they don't wanna do it, it costs more.
And if they wanna do it, then it costs less.
And if they do it on their own accord,
then it's very cheap, maybe even free.
And if you let them do what they want,
you're kinda collecting some leadership capital.
So just the very, any interaction that I have
with Echo Charles, if I say, hey, get this done.
Hey, do this, hey, make a video about this.
That cost me leadership capital.
Cost me leadership capital.
Especially if you don't wanna do it.
It's costing me even more.
Now look, I might have some leadership capital with you
and you're like, all right, fine, I'll do it.
If you wanna do it, if I'm like,
hey, make a video with robots exploding,
you're like, oh, hell yeah.
It didn't cost me very much.
Now if I say to you, man, I wish we had more videos
with robots exploding, you were like, dude,
I'm gonna make a sick one.
That's very cheap.
You're still working, so maybe it cost me a little something.
But if I say, hey man, I have no idea what to do,
what do you think we should do?
And you're like, we need to make a video
with robots exploding.
I go, that's awesome.
I actually gained some leadership capital.
So everything, when people are interacting with you,
are there's gonna be leadership capital spent?
And by the way, every interaction that I have with you,
never mind just a task, but when we interact with each other,
there's leadership capital being exchanged.
And we as people always think we have
more leadership capital than we do.
Here's a couple of things that will throw you for a loop.
You think rank gives you a bunch of leadership capital?
It doesn't.
Rank, it gives you a little tiny bit.
Because hey man, obviously I'm in this position
and you haven't been here as long as me
and I've done this stuff before.
So there's an element of leadership capital
that comes with rank.
But it's not as much as we think.
Actually when I give ownership to someone,
when I say, hey Echo, you go ahead and run this project
the way you want.
You seem to have a good grasp on it.
That actually earns me leadership capital.
So giving ownership earns leadership capital.
Listening to someone as simple as that might sound
gives me leadership capital.
When you come to me and say,
I want to talk to you about something,
I go, oh, I get out my notebook
and I say, hey, tell me what you got.
You're like, I have this idea of doing this
and I'm writing it down.
That gives me leadership capital.
You could do like a little, whether it be fresh on front
or whatever, you could do like a fun little quiz.
And it's like leadership capital quiz.
Is this spending it or earning it?
And you could do little things.
You could probably go pretty deep with that.
You can go real deep.
I've covered that in the academy.
How to earn leadership capital.
And what costs leadership capital.
So you definitely, that's good.
We could do it on here at some point as well.
It's surprising how much listening to people
gives you leadership capital.
And usually when I talk about the opposite of that
is when people go, oh yeah, he's right.
Cause listen, if you start telling me something
and I cut you off, right?
And you might not realize the weight of when you're
telling me something and I listen to you.
You might not.
It's like a subconscious.
You be some consciously giving me leadership capital.
Some conscious like, oh yeah, hell yeah.
But when I cut you off and you're trying to express
something to me and I just cut you off.
And I'm like, yeah, hey look,
let's get to the topic of the day.
You're just, that costs me a lot of leadership capital.
Just like anything, and that's just do with respect.
You know what you were talking about earlier?
A crappy job.
If we got something, if we gotta go pick up brass
and I'm out there doing it with you,
leadership capital goes up.
If I'm in the air conditioning place,
leadership capital goes down.
So there's all these things that are going on.
Bro, it gets kind of tricky too though.
And maybe it's my little P brain mind going too deep
into it, maybe it's not.
But like, let's say you, okay,
you know your story, right?
The patches, right?
So you let, we'll say, you let something slide, right?
You let something slide, sometimes that can,
under certain circumstances that can gain you,
may have you gain leadership capital,
but under other circumstances you can lose it.
It's the same action.
You let something slide.
But it's like, oh, you gotta understand.
That's why you wrote the dichotomy of leadership.
That's why a quiz would be pretty good.
And that's why leadership is tricky.
It's tricky because you gotta assess that.
And that's why I'm talking about this leadership loop.
Because so often people aren't actually just checking them.
So I was like, wait a second,
I wonder how bad Echo actually wants to do this.
I wonder what this is costing me.
The reason that it weighs so heavily for me,
first of all, it's because leadership capital
is the currency of winning.
If you wanna win, you gotta have a bunch of leadership
capital built up.
And I put so much weight on leadership capital
because this is interesting thing to think about.
Most of the time,
one idea, it's only a little bit better
than some other idea.
Very rarely are you and I working at a company
or in a military unit or part of a team.
And your idea is so radically different from mine
that I'm willing to, that I even need to think about,
hey, is that a good decision or not?
Usually your idea is pretty good.
You're like, in your mind, you're like,
hey, I wanna explode a Star Wars robots.
And I think you should explode.
Terminator.
Terminator robots, right?
Are those two things worth arguing about?
No, no.
Are they worth it?
They're not.
I think one thing, you think another thing,
but the things that we're thinking
are very closely related.
So therefore, what trumps the idea,
because the ideas are so close,
what trumps the idea is leadership capital.
We have a common goal.
We have a common capability.
We have common experiences.
And we're gonna come up with pretty similar plans
because we're both coming from the same place.
Therefore, your plan is probably gonna be viable.
And because your plan is viable,
because what I said, you want Star Wars?
Terminator.
Okay, because you want Terminator robots
and I want Star Wars robots, they're both viable.
But because they're both viable,
I make the expenditure of leadership capital
a very heavy weighted element of my decision.
Because the decision between Star Wars robots
or Terminator robots isn't gonna make that much of a difference.
Now, are there people that freaking dig in
about what robot needs to die?
Hell yeah, there are.
And they're idiots for doing it.
I don't care.
And the reason I don't care is
because building leadership capital is the strategic move.
That's the strategic move,
because if we're spending leadership capital all the time,
we won't have any left,
or even worse, we'll end up in debt.
And that's not gonna end well.
Because by the way,
when I don't have any leadership capital with you
and I ask you to do something,
you're not gonna do it.
If I have a ton of leadership capital
and I need you to do something,
and there's no time to talk about it,
and you don't believe in it,
but I need to get it done,
I can actually spend some of that leadership capital
and we can move forward.
So, that's what I'm gonna do.
When I'm making a decision as to whether or not
to go left or right, or use Terminator robots
or Star Wars robots,
I'm going to put a huge amount of weight
on how much leadership capital this is going to cost me.
And see and weigh whether this is,
whether this is the right move or not.
Most of the time, it's not.
Leadership capital is more valuable
than any other elements in the world.
Leadership capital, everything that's wrapped up
in leadership capital, trust, integrity, vision, unity.
There's all these things that are wrapped up in it.
That's what makes it so valuable.
It's like this thing that has so much power.
And yet people throw it away.
People don't even realize how valuable it is.
I'll just throw it away on this, that, or the other thing.
Like, hey, you just need to get this done.
Boom, I just spent freaking however many units
worth of leadership capital.
Dude, you just need to be quiet and get this done.
Boom, I'm just throwing money away.
Hey, hey, Jocko, I gotta go to,
hey, look, I don't need to hear your ideas right now.
We need to move forward.
Okay, cool, that just cost me.
It's like everything we do.
People just throw it away like it's nothing.
They break out the freaking, they go into debt.
They go into, then they end up bankrupt.
Leadership.
You ever met someone that has no leadership capital left?
Yes, I have.
Yeah, like you work for someone that's an asshole.
You work for someone that doesn't listen to anybody else.
They have no leadership capital.
And maybe they can make some things happen early on
because they have the authority or they have the experience
or they have the position.
And that, they can actually make a little bit of progress
and then the leadership capital's gone
and everything just falls apart.
Yeah, and that's like a, back,
and I've said this before, so I don't need to go too deep
into it, but you know how like you have an old boss
that you used to work for and he was just a dick
or whatever and he don't work there anymore.
You work at a better job now, you know?
And then maybe you see that old boss somewhere,
the way you feel about him.
You can see his leadership capital is at zero
at that point.
At zero.
So that's what I'm gonna do.
I'm gonna consider leadership capital
and it's gonna weigh very heavily.
And by the way, the reason I didn't put this
on the list originally, because it was so,
it was so integral to the way I think
I didn't even see it there.
You know what I mean?
It was just one of those things.
It was almost like, if I was to put down,
what do you need every day, Echo?
You'd be like, hey, I need a good workout.
I need to get a good steak.
I wanna roll a jiu-jitsu.
And I'd be like, what about oxygen?
What about air?
You'd be like, well, yeah, obviously.
That's, leadership capital for me was like breathing air.
It was that integral to my day.
I didn't even see it was there.
Yeah.
So.
Yeah, now that you bring it up though,
it's like, it's not like air, right?
Cause it's so like people don't understand.
Oh no, actually wrong.
It is like air.
Or it is, but they're ignoring it.
So it's like that.
Well, it is, but people don't realize
how valuable it is they can't breathe.
So they don't even realize it's there.
And they're like just wasting it
and it doesn't matter.
It'll always be there.
No, it's not.
You get choked out.
So what happens?
Tell me you're not concerned about air
when you get that guillotine choke sunk on you.
I am concerned about air.
Yeah, real concerned.
Yes.
So be careful.
Tell me if you think this is an example
of being in touch with leadership capital.
So, you know, as you know, we have this dog now,
a small dog.
Never wanted a dog.
I didn't want a dog.
What's your dog's name?
Maya.
It's a small little we what do you call it?
Yorkie.
I think I don't know what you call it.
Cause I don't have the dog.
Come on, bro.
You know what it's called.
Anyway, one of these little small dogs, whatever.
It's whatever.
It's cute.
I never wanted the dog.
We're going to add another thing to the like simple life.
All the kids want dogs.
My wife, maybe, maybe she wanted the dog.
Maybe not, but she hears it from the kids every day.
Oh my gosh.
Every time the kids see a dog.
And there's people in our neighborhood,
neighborhood with cool little dogs and stuff.
And they're nice dogs.
And so they're great examples of dogs all around
constantly being reminded how they don't have a dog.
Right.
So finally I'm like, hey, all right.
I kind of went through this loop a little bit
in a small way where I'm like, hey, you know, like
leadership capital at some point in there.
Exactly. Right.
So I'm like, all right.
Now, this would be actually be an interesting thing
for us to do is go through your decision to get a dog
and assess your leadership loop on this thing.
Right.
I mean, you know, time, well, you do have plenty of time
to make this decision.
You didn't like rush one week and be like,
okay, we need to get a dog now.
I know you took time to consider it.
Two years by the way.
So there you go.
Cover move.
You were like, hey, if we don't get a dog,
is that putting me first?
Yes, it is.
And so you kind of made that decision.
Like, okay, gotta put the team first.
Simple.
This is one of those things where you're like,
well, this is going to actually make things more complex.
So you had to put that into the calculus.
Right.
Prioritize and execute.
Well, is it one of our priorities?
Well, we saw some family unity being created.
And so that was a positive thing.
So the priority kind of stepped up a little bit
because we want the family to be tight.
And yeah, and there's other elements in that too,
because, you know, like, okay, so my daughter's nine.
So getting a small dog too.
This is like a small, it's not like some big great Dane
where it's like more responsibility
or whatever it's a small little dog, minimal,
arguably responsibility comparatively speaking.
And you have a pet that it actually is responsibility
for the kid obviously being supported by us, of course,
you know, but you get to learn a little bit
of that responsibility, sacrifice, you know,
and stuff like that.
So it was a net pot as far as priorities go
and the developmental elements of a kid.
And let's face it, like,
is it unreasonable for a kid to have a childhood pet?
Is that unreasonable?
No, no, it's good.
And as you just mentioned, there's lessons to be learned.
Exactly, right.
Which goes into decentralized command.
You know that is this something you can decentralize?
So what did you go, oh, we're gonna get this dog
and then I'm gonna have to walk it.
I'm gonna have to feed it.
No, you were probably like,
hey, I'm not cleaning up dog shit, right?
I'm not gonna be the one that feeds it every day.
So you knew you could decentralize some of this stuff.
So that is additionally positive here.
Was it your ego that was getting in the way a little bit?
Cause, hey, check it out.
Let's face it, the dog is gonna take a little attention away
from Echo Charles just a little bit, right?
And plus you might have been like,
hey, this is my house, right?
You could get into that mode.
And that is,
I'm not saying you did, but it could be a fact.
It did a little bit, maybe not necessarily
in that particular way.
Like this is my house and I make those, it wasn't that.
It was more about like, oh yeah, everyone wants this dog,
but what about what I want?
It was like that.
And I was like, bro, that's kind of wack.
You don't want to realize that.
Good, okay.
Emotion.
You had to at least check the emotion that you were having
and that everyone else was having.
Cause if you don't, you, you weighed in
how happy everyone was gonna be.
And that countered how like somewhat frustrated
you were gonna be.
You actually went through this and thought to yourself,
you know what?
Them being super happy outweighs me being
a little bit aggravated.
So you put, you did the calculus of the emotion,
made the right call, mission.
Does this help our mission as a family?
Again, helps bring the family together.
There's lessons to be learned.
We have something to talk about.
We have a, what's that?
A common affection towards this thing.
Even though this thing is small and weak
and doesn't really protect us from anything,
which is okay.
But it gets the kids outside even more,
you know, all this stuff.
Leadership cap.
So this is where we get to.
So now you got to a point where as leadership capital,
you were, and how did you calculate that
on the dog purchase?
Which in a small way went back to measuring the emotions
and comparing them, but it was essentially that.
Like people, everyone knew that I didn't want a dog.
In fact, they've been knowing it for two years.
I'm not the kind of person, whatever that,
that's like, no, you know, like I don't complain
about that kind of stuff, but they,
everyone knew that I was not really into it at all.
When we got it, I didn't be like, yeah, I wasn't into it,
but I did it anyway for you guys.
None of that kind of stuff.
I was just kind of like, I was like,
hey, if that's what we're doing, let's do it.
And I'm so, actually I will clean up after it.
Not as a priority, but I'm down for the support, 100%.
So when it was time to get the dog or whatever,
I was like, I basically got on board.
And I figured, and I guess in terms of leadership cap,
I wasn't thinking of it in terms of leadership cap at all,
but I wasn't thinking of it in terms of like,
hey, what would like, what's the right thing to do here?
And something that would, if I get on board
in a positive way, in a conducive way,
that's gonna be better off for everybody.
So that's just what I did.
But kind of maybe, how should I say,
inadvertently or whatever, just not thinking of it.
I'm sure that did,
because people know that I didn't want the dog,
but meanwhile I have a good attitude about it.
I'm still cleaning up.
And let's face it, this is the classic tale, right?
Where the dad doesn't want the dog,
then the dad ends up being the best friend
of the dog kind of a thing, you know?
We're not quite there yet,
but I have embraced the dog on a personal level.
Teeny, tiny dog.
So I feel like, if they even notice, who knows?
They're little kids.
I guarantee you that's the leadership capital out of this.
Guaranteed.
And that's good.
That's good.
Because over time, also, you gotta think,
how much am I spending leadership capital
when this is the one thing they want
and I'm not getting it for them?
That could be a problem.
And I shouldn't even say,
I probably wouldn't actually be that big of a problem.
And the reason it's not that big of a problem,
because it's a huge ask, right?
It's a huge ask.
A dog is a big deal, man.
You can't just be getting a dog on a whim.
You should go through this checklist
before you go and invest in a dog
or pick up a dog from the dog pound
or whatever you're gonna do.
Here's what I do have in mind consciously
in regards to leadership capital.
If I complain about that dog or about having the dog,
not even necessarily about the dog,
because you can complain about it,
like, frick, the dog's barking, you know, whatever.
But if I complain about having the dog,
that is like, to me, it feels like I'm like,
spending so much of that leadership capital
because it's like, I never wanted that dog, you know?
Making everyone feel guilty or something like this.
Never.
It's against the straight up morals.
Yeah, that would be that.
That's so strict, I think, that release.
That would be that.
So, leadership capital, put that in the calculus.
It's more valuable than the air that you breathe
from a leadership perspective.
Now, the next thing is, as,
and I've mentioned this a bunch already,
but as I'm judging or assessing all these aspects
of a decision, I am going to the whole time,
pay attention to my own bias.
You know, do I tend to think
that I have too much leadership capital?
Because there's people that are like that.
They think, oh, hey, man, don't worry.
I'm jockeling, man, people are just, no.
Do I underestimate the amount
of leadership capital that I have?
First of all, that's rare, and it's usually not true.
But those are things that I am going to do.
I am going to constantly be assessing my own bias.
So you might wanna throw onto your leadership loop
bias assessment to make sure that you're not
making a mistake because of the biases that you have.
Or you can put that into each one of these topics,
ego, emotion, mission, leadership capital.
You can put bias into each one of those subcategories
to say, you know what?
I know I'm always letting my ego get in the way.
Or maybe you're saying the other opposite side,
you know I'm never confident enough with my decisions.
On time, right?
What's your bias?
Do you think everything takes five minutes
when it really takes a half an hour?
Calculate that bias.
And then the last thing I'm gonna say here
is something that I like to think about.
Am I looking at the symptoms
or am I looking at the root cause?
Because a lot of times the solution
that's right in front of your face
is actually a solution to a symptom.
And we see this like 2D solution
that's right in front of us.
And it's usually obvious.
And here's what's tricky, it's usually right.
Usually the first, you know, if Echo's doing something
or if we gotta come up with a plan
and I come up with a quick plan to solve a problem,
usually that first plan that we both see is a solution
and it will work.
But there's a good chance that we're both reacting
to a symptom and not to the disease.
So I like to just check myself and say
is what I'm looking at the symptom?
Or is it the actual root cause of the problem?
And is the solution that's being proposed
or the plan I'm coming up with,
is it a 2D solution for something
that's right in front of me?
Or is it a 3D that will actually get us a long-term solution?
So that's what I'm gonna look at.
Now, here's what messes us up in this loop
and it's pretty similar to what can mess you up
in the OODA loop.
Number one is you can get stuck in any one of these areas.
Just like you get stuck in the OODA loop,
in the OODA loop you can get stuck observing.
You're just looking around, looking around,
trying to see what you see.
You're trying to get every angle and you get stuck there.
You get stuck looking around and you get shot down.
Maybe you get stuck orienting yourself.
You're like, wait, hold on, where are they?
Where am I?
Hold on, let me see exactly where I'm in.
You get shot down.
Maybe you get stuck in the decision,
but wait, should I go left, should I go right,
should I go left, should I go right?
I don't know if there's advantage,
it's going left, there's advantage,
going right, you get shot down.
Or act, you won't take action.
You don't do the action, you get shot down.
So if you get stuck in any of these as well, same thing.
If you get stuck thinking about any of these things,
and you let it become the focus,
I want to make sure my ego's not a problem.
And that's what you focus on.
You don't consider time, you don't consider emotion,
you don't consider the mission.
So you can't get stuck on any of these things.
You can't get stuck.
You have to let the loop continue to flow.
And you know what you're gonna figure out?
You're gonna figure out that there's some things
that you're good at in this loop,
and there's some things that you're bad at in this loop.
Maybe your ego's not a problem,
but you have a problem with time.
Maybe your emotion isn't a problem,
but you always get distracted by different missions.
Maybe you cover and move really well,
but you don't realize that you expend leadership capital
on stuff that doesn't matter.
So you want to continually observe these things,
and you want to overindex on the things
that you know you are weak at.
So that's the number one way that we get messed up
when we're making decisions.
The number two things we ignore the feedback
that we're getting, which is such a disaster.
It's such a disaster to ignore the feedback
that we're getting.
And the point I made earlier about Echo Charles
and how my ego is gonna lie to me,
your ego is lying 100% of the time.
Let me just say that.
My ego is saying, actually, in this case,
Jocko, look, I know I get it, but this echo really is the problem.
He really is the problem.
That, and when I ignore that, the fact that,
I'm sorry, not that I ignore it,
but I let my ego convince me that, you know what,
this time, just this one time, my ego's right.
It's not.
Or just this one time, hey, this is an emotional decision.
It's the right thing to do.
Jocko said, you need to put emotions into calculus,
and I'm pissed, so we're gonna do it.
No.
We ignore feedback, and of course,
this comes from a lack of humility.
When you're being told something, even in your own head,
but you ignore it, like, you know,
I know Echo might kinda get screwed by this decision,
but you know, he's not gonna notice, boom.
You're just lying to yourself.
You're ignoring the feedback, and that's gonna cost you.
And so in order to do that, this comes back
to a fundamental skill of leadership
that I wrote about in leadership strategy and tactics,
and that is the ability to take a step back and detach.
That's the only way you're gonna see this stuff.
You can't, detachment is a superpower,
and the reason that detachment is a superpower
is because the solution to the problem
is not in the problem.
The solution to the problem will not be found
inside the problem.
You gotta step outside the problem
in order to see the solution.
Don't get wrapped up in the problem itself.
Instead, take a step back, run through this loop
so you can make better decisions.
And what is an important thing to recognize?
You might be thinking like, oh, well, I'm not, you know,
the CEO of some big company,
and I don't need me to make a bunch of decisions.
Guess what?
Life is a series of decisions all day, every day.
That's what life is.
Everything that you do is a decision.
It's almost like the binary decision,
which I wrote about in Discipline and Freedom's Manual.
Everything that you do is a decision.
They're not always necessarily binary,
but when you live life, you're making decisions.
Everything you do is a decision.
So because everything you do is a decision,
once you realize that, you should detach,
and you should have a protocol for making decisions
because then your decisions will be better.
And you should have the humility to realize
when you aren't making good decisions,
and when you get that feedback and realize,
oh, I gotta make some different decisions now.
And then you make adjustments,
and you make better decisions, and you move on.
But, and what's beautiful about this is it means
that if everything in your life
is based on the decisions you're making, guess what?
You have a lot of control over your life
based on the decisions that you make.
So make good decisions.
It's gonna make you a better person.
It's gonna make you a better leader.
It's gonna give you a better life.
All right, there you go.
Echo Charles.
Yes sir.
Speaking of good decisions,
I know there's some ways that people could decide
to support themselves a little bit better.
Yeah, it's true.
And they could support this podcast while they're doing it.
It's true.
They could support America while they're doing it.
Very true, yeah.
Which is kind of a big deal.
Especially considering how tenuous the world is right now.
World's a tenuous place.
Sure.
There's other elements out there making a move.
Got China making a move.
They're out there making a move.
They're trying to take the rushes out there.
They're making a move.
People are stepping up.
Moves are being made.
And are we gonna sit back?
Now, does this mean you need to pick up a rifle
and go to war?
No.
But I'll tell you what you can do.
You can support America.
I know a good way to do that.
Yeah, me too.
Well, it starts with ourselves, right?
I think a lot of the time.
Do you talk about good decisions where,
look, other people not making decisions for you
unless you're letting them.
But you wanna make good decisions for yourself, right?
I would imagine.
So it starts with yourself.
We're taking care of ourselves physically, mentally.
Mentally.
Deciding to.
That's what we're doing.
It's true.
So we're working out, of course.
100%.
We're reading.
I know that.
Yes, we are.
We should be.
At the very least listening.
Wait, are you reading?
I'm reading here and there.
Bro, I don't know about this.
Wait a second here.
What are you reading?
Well, there was, okay, so there's a book.
You can't reference mind games
which you read nine years ago.
Yeah, probably not.
I think that may be the only book you've ever referenced
since I've known you.
Oh, I don't know.
I've read plenty of books.
Okay, what do we got?
What's on the docket?
Echo Charles.
Most of the time I'm gonna tell you what's currently
on the docket, because it'd have to, you know.
But.
Wait a second, bro.
You can be honest.
We're telling each other the truth.
This is like leadership, you know,
a capital we're trying to build.
If you're not gonna tell me like,
oh, no, no, right now I'm not reading anything,
Jock, because you know, it's summertime
and I was in Hawaii.
And so we're not reading anything unless you are.
Yes.
So.
So what are we reading right now?
Nothing or this book?
So depends, because that's a spectrum.
Right?
Right.
Bro.
You should own this a hundred percent right now.
Otherwise it's not gonna look right.
Here's a hundred percent truth on the matter.
So I have Kindle books and audio books, like,
you know, some are halfway done,
some are all done, some are whatever.
So when, how much time has to be elapsed
between the last time I was into one of these books,
actually like reading it or listening to it to now,
how much time has to pass before I'm technically not reading?
Let's just say a week.
Okay.
We might not be reading.
No.
But.
All right.
That being said.
That's kind of a bummer.
That means that the books that you're reading
or even listening to must not be that captivating.
Or, well, yeah, I mean,
I guess in a manner of speaking technically, yeah,
but that doesn't mean that they're not captivating.
That might mean that other things that I'm doing.
They're competing with life.
And life is captivating, which is a good thing.
Yes, sir.
Right?
I never thought of that comeback.
You know, some people are like,
I'm reading three books a week.
Be like, oh, that's cool.
I'm actually living.
Yeah.
Right?
That could be a little bit of a dichotomy.
Could be, yes.
And obviously that's going to depend
because reading three books a week,
one, we don't know how fast they read or listen
or whatever or what they're doing.
You know, what if they're going out miles, runs,
we're doing the same thing.
You know, it's kind of a, you know,
so it can be an awesome,
it can be kind of what you're alluding to
where it's like cool.
Flexing, no.
That's fine.
Oh wait, flexing with the, I'm reading.
That's just a flex.
Like, like a fourth book I've read this month.
Right, right.
Just to sort of brag and make like, yeah.
Well, you know, there are many variations of flexing.
Cause it'd be an interesting reflex.
We'll be like, I don't have time to read books.
Yeah.
Or that could be an excuse.
It could be an excuse.
Yeah, so it just depends.
It's a dichotomy.
Okay, so where is Echo Charles at?
In this spectrum that we were considering.
The last book that I finished,
which was recently, I don't know, whatever,
a few months, actually I read it twice.
So it was the four agreements recommended by Jason Gardner.
Yeah, that's a good one.
And you guys, I heard you guys talking about it
and you seemed both, you know,
you were both concurred that it was good.
Yeah.
And a lot of times that type of book,
and I mean, this type, that type of book
in this particular way is, it's real like,
like it has a lot of spiritual like terms, you know?
But, and you know, usually spiritual terms are real.
Like they land on different people in different ways.
Okay, I'm not tracking spiritual term.
I.e. what?
What's the spiritual term?
Like, you know, calling things black magic
or cause he'll use that term a lot.
Yeah, but he's using those terms
cause I heard you guys talking about it.
And I think I might've even been talking
to you a little bit about it or Jason,
those are just like an analogy.
Like this type of attitude is black magic.
That's negative.
Yes.
So I took it in that way.
Okay.
Like, this is an analogy.
It's not like he was saying his literal black magic.
Yeah.
And every once in a while it kind of felt like that.
But either way, I never took it as that.
Like to me, that's not the useful part of it.
The useful part is many other things,
but anytime they say something like black magic,
I know what he's saying.
I know what you mean.
I think I do anyway.
I believe I do.
So I just, I put it that way.
I took it in that way.
But yeah.
So that being said, the spiritual parts,
even with those spiritual parts or whatever,
like what he was saying with all the four agreements
is like very, it's a good one.
It's a good one.
And a lot of it might not come as like a surprise.
Like, oh man, I totally didn't know that.
But just like a lot of books about like ways to think
and regard yourself and the world and stuff.
It's like, oh, okay, that makes sense.
Or that's a good reminder.
You know.
It's kind of like what we just covered.
There's a lot of people that are like,
of course you should consider if you're screwing over your
buddy.
Yep.
And it seems obvious.
But there's times that people do this aware, unaware.
And I think the big warning there is like,
you think no one notices everybody else.
So yeah.
Some things can be, actually,
I think when something seems obvious,
usually that's affirming to like,
this has got to be, this is pretty true.
Because I know I felt this way.
And now I'm seeing this guy felt this way.
And now, you know, so it becomes like a thing.
Yeah.
And sometimes it just puts certain things,
certain elements into perspective
that you might not have realized how important they are
or how prevalent they are in day to day, you know, stuff.
Awareness.
When you're aware of things, you become,
just awareness is a huge step up in understanding
and reacting properly.
And interacting properly with the world.
Like the idea that you actually brought up a few times today,
the idea that like people notice.
Like, I see what you're doing or I see
whether it be your intention
or when they're getting screwed over, whatever.
Like the idea that people can see what's going on,
I think that's one of the many things that's like,
it helps to understand how big of a thing that is.
Like, you know how it's like,
yeah, sometimes they'll notice, sometimes they won't.
It kind of feels like that sometimes.
They notice.
Oh yeah, people know it.
Like, you know how, and I've said this before,
I got it from Sam Harris where it's like,
when you name drop someone,
it's like, everyone sees you name drop it.
And it's not even like a noble thing.
You mean when you talk about it,
I got this from Sam Harris?
Oh yeah.
After we hung out this one day, it was awesome.
But that's like, one of the many examples of,
sure maybe somebody caught it,
but I'm sure it was effective when I did.
But everyone noticed the same way
you'll notice when someone else does it.
It's kind of one of those things.
But, and there's a lot of things like that.
You know, so yeah, I think that book overall
was a lot of that.
But some stuff was like,
oh, that is a good way to look at things, you know?
And sometimes when somebody's written something out
and they've explained it, it clarifies it for you.
It increases your understanding
and the better understanding you have,
then the more you can interact with that properly,
you can utilize that as a tool.
That's good stuff.
So yeah, we wanna read.
Very unvarying levels, you know?
Yeah, if you start reading one book a week over here,
you're gonna be like, that's good.
That's good.
If you're reading one book a week, that's good, man.
It's hard to say that that's bad.
Yeah, I don't actually know if I've,
there was a while where I was reading one book every week
when we were doing the podcast
and it was like almost all books.
And then it seemed like we went a little,
a bunch of people were coming on for interviews.
So that was a little bit more interview-centric.
So, but I, this I can say,
there is no period of time of more than two days
where I haven't read something.
Oh, damn.
Yeah, so that's kind of where I'm at.
But that's not a flex, bro, because guess what?
Maybe I should be surfing or getting in fights at REI.
Sure, hell yeah, parking lot fights.
I'll just explain the situation.
But we are working out every day.
You know Joel Tudor, yeah, you know.
Of course.
Joel Tudor, he, if you don't know,
he's surfer and a Jiu-Jitsu guy, awesome guy.
But he like posted something,
something about like basically kook surfers.
Like, you know, surfer Starter Kit,
Malibu surfer starter kit.
And one of the pictures was like a sprinter.
I responded on his post.
I was like, hey bro, I got a sprinter.
Yeah, yeah.
So, sorry Joel.
Sorry Joel, I got a sprinter.
There, people.
Well, so it was kind of a confirmation, really.
You know, small way.
Oh, they just called me a kook, huh?
That's messed up.
I was up on the horses and I asked the guys,
the actual cowboys, I said, hey, I said, hey,
in surfing, if you don't know how to surf,
but you have a surfboard and you're paddling out,
but you have no idea what you're doing,
then you're a kook.
I said, what's that called on horseback riding?
And, cause that's me, cause I don't know how to ride a horse.
And they said, it's a dude.
So there's a thing called a dude ranch,
which is basically for city slickers to go out
and like be a cowboy for a little while.
Oh, I didn't know that.
And so, if you're one of those people, then you are a dude.
That's weird, I've heard of dude ranch.
There was another word that they told me as well,
but I can't remember it.
Yeah.
It's funny.
But I was one of those, I am one of those on a horse.
You're a dude?
Yeah.
That's funny, there was a show called Hey Dude,
and it was about a dude ranch and it was,
I think it was on Nickelodeon too or something.
Back in the day.
Well, hey man, learn something new every day.
See, sometimes you don't even have to read.
You just come listen to Jocko, being a dude,
or Kuk, or whatever you're being over there.
But we are working out every day.
Yes.
Like currently working out.
Like you're-
You can make that claim.
You don't have to sort of put explanations around that claim.
Bro, your face was so guilty when you said you read.
I was like, dude, please don't lie.
Well, I was trying to do the calculus
because that's a legitimate question.
Because if you say, oh, I'm working out, right?
But you haven't worked out in two weeks,
you're like, bro, you're not working out.
You're currently not working out actually.
But if it's been like two days, that's like, okay,
you could have just been coming off a rest weekend
or something like this and you're still on the program,
so you're saying, we're working out.
So with reading, how is that?
I never thought about it.
So look, if I read last night before I went to bed
or something, easy, right?
I know the answer.
Oh, I'm reading this last night.
I was reading this, but let's face it.
It's been three weeks.
So that was the guiltiness.
And three weeks is kind of a gift, isn't it?
Yeah.
Huh?
It, yeah, yeah.
I'm gonna agree with you.
It's kind of a gift.
Yeah.
I'm giving you the opportunity to tell the truth.
Wait, wait, wait, what do you mean three weeks is a gift?
I'm saying me saying, oh, you were reading three weeks ago,
you were reading.
Oh, yeah, yeah, me.
It's kind of me being not generous.
Yeah, technically, I don't know.
I've never done the math and the technical evaluation,
but if you compare it to working out.
I hope you never get interrogated.
I know, right?
Me too.
I know.
If you compare it to working out,
then no, I'm not reading.
Currently not reading.
But here's the thing too though.
Did you already lift today?
No, not yet.
This afternoon?
Squats today, by the way.
Okay.
Either way.
You got that mental prep going.
Yeah, a little bit.
But here's the thing about reading versus working out.
You can pick up a book for like 10 minutes.
You can read three pages.
Working out, if I go do one, two sets of curls,
is that a workout?
I know it's BTN.
I know, I know.
BTN is better than nothing.
Which is a non-philosophy in my opinion.
But, it's just my opinion.
How about this?
We'll use that philosophy very sparingly.
How about that?
All right.
But you see what I'm saying though.
Yes, you can read a short amount
and it still is providing legitimate benefits
and progress.
Whereas two sets of curls,
while it is BTN, if you believe in that philosophy,
which Echo doesn't,
I would say, it truly is BTN.
It is better than nothing.
Yeah, but if I go two sets of curls
and then now I say,
you know what, that's gonna be my workout routine.
After about two months, it's kind of like an N.
Nothing.
I'm not speaking.
So, okay, look.
We got to the bottom of it.
Thank you, Jaco, for your input.
We're hopefully reading.
We're hopefully working out.
We're hopefully improving ourselves
so we can deal with the world
in a better way to make better decisions.
Right.
So get some JacoFuel.
Get yourself some more.
Get yourself some, hey,
this is, of all the things we're gonna say about JacoFuel,
the flavors of the Discipline Go drinks
have been radically upgraded.
They were based on my taste buds before.
My taste buds are not normal.
My taste buds weren't appropriate
to judge the taste of a drink for the world.
I had to run that through the leadership decision loop
and say, wait, my perspective on this is not correct.
Other people have a more,
a better palette for the job.
And we also want something that's more universally loved.
So we redid all the flavors.
All the flavors are now awesome.
You may have had one flavor that you really liked before
and you might have had two that you just like,
these are gross.
They weren't down for you.
Now you will at least like all the flavors.
And there will be three and maybe five of them that you love.
Yeah, I would say that's probably true.
Totally redid them all.
They taste delicious.
If you tried them when they were based on my palette,
I apologize.
I'm taking ownership of the fact that
I had a very sensitive palette to sweetness
and a little bit of sweetness
that tasted like sugarcane in my mouth.
And that wasn't the truth.
Besides this, you just drink water though,
pre-deme for the most part.
That's what I'm saying.
That's why my palette was so jacked.
And recently I got on the water train.
So the only thing that I drink is water.
Every once in a while, I'll have like a moke shake.
Actually I have that more, but even now,
everything is way sweeter.
Everything.
If you just drink water.
Before I have an occasional Gatorade here,
maybe some, you know, the kids got some orange juice.
Well, that's a good example too.
Mango, I didn't like your mango flavor of Discipline Go.
Mango mayhem.
And now it tastes really good.
It's still not my favorite of the group,
but I will definitely enjoy drinking it.
So we're good.
Yeah, I feel like we're good too.
So there you go.
Get out here and get you some of that.
Also, we got the Hunt Gear coming.
OriginUSA.com.
Get yourself some American made Hunt Gear.
And listen, that's just what we have to do
in the world right now.
Like I said, there's people that are stepping up.
People that are not good.
And they're stepping up.
And they're trying to take over.
And you don't need to necessarily pick up a rifle
to go to war.
But right now it's an economic war.
And if you pick up some OriginUSA gear,
it's gonna help us win the war.
So we don't have to fight a war.
That's the goal.
Let's be economically strong.
So go to OriginUSA.com, get a G.
Cause you should be trained in just in case
the war does come.
Get some Hunt Gear.
Just in case the war does come.
You can hunt the enemy.
But in the meantime, you can hunt deer, elk,
whatever else it is you wanna hunt.
Get yourself some of that.
Also, we have a store.
Don't we have a store?
We do.
Okay.
What's that all about?
It's called Jaco Store.
You wanna represent, well, we're improving ourselves,
making good decisions.
You wanna represent discipline equals freedom.
Which is kind of the overarching kind of thing
for this whole thing.
More discipline, you are the more freedom you are.
Anyway, you wanna represent, we got some cool shirts
and hats and hoodies and whatnot, some merch.
But it's better than just merch though, by the way.
A lot of thought and effort and careful,
meticulous consideration has been put
into all of these elements.
You should put that into every package that you send out.
Just let everybody know that careful time,
consideration has been put into this.
Oh yeah.
But and it's true.
There are many people, I wanna say many,
I mean for accountless people that have said these,
like this called the shirts and stuff like,
it's my favorite shirt.
What's the new shirt that you have on right now?
This is called the standard issue, right?
This one equals freedom, standard issue.
So it's a new one.
And there's multiple color ways.
Color ways, yeah.
You might recognize the colors and what they represent.
But if you don't, that's fine.
There's a kinda layer there.
Yes, sir.
People need to figure out what the layers mean.
Yep, simple, but maybe not easy.
Kind of a thing.
I actually didn't figure out, you guys told me.
I may have figured out, if I would have
maybe seen them all at the same time
and done a consideration, I might have figured it out.
But I didn't figure out, but also I looked at them
for like three seconds, I was like,
oh, you tell me, I'm freaking out.
Well, when you looked at the one,
you were like, that's what that is.
And then all you had to do is apply
that same thinking to all of them.
You'd be like, I see what's going on here.
But yeah, but either way, layers there for sure.
But if you don't know, layers doesn't even matter.
You just choose the color that you like or the colors.
And then if you do understand the layers,
then it kinda matters too.
Yes, sir.
Doesn't matter if you don't get them,
but if you get them, it kinda does matter.
Yeah, it does.
Let's face it, because if you listen, you know.
You know.
This is the way I see it.
This one is kinda like this, why we call it standard issue.
It's kinda like the main one we're positioning as,
kinda the main discipline equals freedom.
The standard, if you have this one,
you're, that's the standard.
You have the standard issue.
Yeah.
Like if you don't have it, like,
are you even in the game or what?
I'm not saying you're not, but you see what I'm saying.
Here's the question.
You don't have the standard issues, what I'm saying.
All right, there you go.
So yeah, jockhostort.com.
We also have the short locker.
Don't forget about that subscription.
One shirt, a new shirt, one month, there.
New different designs.
Little bit more creative, I would say.
Those are pretty good ones coming out.
Yeah, you gave me a brief on the one that's coming out.
Yeah.
I'll say it's affirmative.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's a good one.
Is that next, when's that, how far out is that?
Um, so August, September.
Oh, that's a good one for September.
All right, awesome.
Subscribe to the podcast, you know that.
A jockhostortground.com.
We've put some out there.
If you wanna get some questions to us,
we'll respond to those directly.
And it's also giving us the ability
to have our own platform to make sure
that whenever we get banned from this one,
which could happen at any time,
or they might just say, hey, from now on,
when you listen to this podcast,
we're gonna insert our own advertisements in here.
So we don't like that.
That's why we made jockhostortground.com.
So if you wanna go there, subscribe to that.
YouTube channel.
If you wanna see awesome assistant directing from me,
you can check out that and I'll get you covered down.
Thanks.
Psychological warfare on MP3.
FlipsideCanvas.com to Kodemire.
I've written a bunch of books about leadership.
Check them out.
Only Cry for the Living by Holly.
Holly McKay, that's a jockal publishing.
She wrote that book.
She risked her life to go write that book.
So she's been on the podcast.
The book is insane to read and it will teach you
about the world and about evil in the world.
So check that out.
We also have Echelon Front, Leadership Consultancy.
Echelonfront.com.
If you wanna meet and come and talk to your company,
let us know.
Echelonfront.com.
If you need help, we can help you.
If you wanna go to any events that I've been talking about,
things like the muster, things like the council,
things like EF Battlefield, just come and check those.
The next EF Battlefield is sold out,
but it's that little big horn looking forward to that.
I think the next muster is in Atlanta,
Hot Lanna, October 12th to the 14th.
We sell out everything, so if you wanna come,
get there quick.
And also we have the online training academy.
I mentioned that a couple times today.
Teaching people how to lead in their life.
And a lot of times people think,
oh, I don't need to learn how to lead.
I'm only in charge of three people.
Or I don't even know how to lead
because I'm not even in charge of anyone.
Guess what?
You are in charge of someone.
You're making decisions all the time.
You have a family.
You have peers that you need to lead.
You have to lead your boss.
I know that seems crazy.
So go to extrememownership.com.
If you want to get in on that online training.
Part of the reason we built that
is to make it more accessible to more people.
That's the mission of Eshalon Front,
to pass on the leadership lessons we learned.
And the Eshalon Front team can't get to everybody.
But now we can, extrememownership.com.
Go and check it out.
And if you want to help service members
act and retired, you want to help their families.
You want to help Gold Star families.
Check out Mark Lee's mom.
Mom and Lee, she's got an incredible charity organization
where she provides most of what she does.
She does a bunch of things.
I would say that the best thing that she does,
well, I don't say the best thing.
How can I say this?
One of the most impactful things that she does,
and she does a lot of impactful things,
is she provides medical help for veterans
that is not provided for by the veterans administration.
So Hyperbaric Chamber is one of the primary things
she does to take someone that's having issues
and pay for them to go to a location
where they have a Hyperbaric Chamber,
put them on the right nutrition,
give them the right vitamins, get their health squared away
for 30 days, everything's paid for.
30 days of recovery from the impact of combat and trauma.
That's one of the things that she does.
So that's at americasmightywarriors.org.
So check that one out.
And then of course, I was talking about being on a horse today
and I'm a dude, meaning I'm not skilled,
but you can, when you're out there in the wilderness
and you're interacting with an animal
and you're in the open air,
it's a very positive thing
for your mental and physical health.
So Micah Fink, he has this thing called Heroes and Horses
at heroesandhorses.org.
He takes veterans into the wilderness for 41 days
and it's horseback, it's camping,
it's staying out on the trail
and guys are coming back renewed
and reanimated for life.
So check out heroesandhorses.org.
He's been on the podcast.
I'm sure we'll get him back on here again at some point,
but he's got a great charity as does Mama Lee.
So check those things out if you wanna support.
And if you wanna check in with us,
we're on social media, on Twitter, on the gram, on Facebook.
Echo's at Echo Charles.
I'm at Jocko'Winling.
Listen, and if you're gonna go on there,
all I'm saying is be careful
because there's an algorithm that's looking to grab you
by the throat.
Don't let it be ready for it.
Don't let it run your life, get off your phone.
And of course, to all those military folks out there
in the world that are making decisions every day
that provide us freedom and security.
Thank you for what you do.
And also thanks to police and law enforcement
and firefighters and paramedics and EMTs
and dispatchers and correctional officers
and border patrol and secret service
and all the first responders.
Thank you for protecting our freedom and security
here at home.
And everyone else out there, life is all decisions.
And everything you do
is based on decisions that you make.
So think about the process.
And think about the amount of control
that these decisions give you over your own life.
And think about the impact that these decisions have
in your life.
So don't just let them happen.
Make them happen.
Make them happen by being aware of your decisions
and make them happen by having a protocol
so you make the right decisions to do the right things
so you can be a better leader, a better person
and lead a better life.
And until next time, this is Echo and Jaco.
Ciao.